---
title: "CodeBook.md"
author: "Jeff Dean"
date: "11/10/2019"
output: html_document
---

## Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
For this project the script run_analysis.R was created to modify the UCI HAR Dataset, to create a new tidy data set. The new data set summarizes features extracted from measures of subject activity, generated using cellphone inertial sensors.  The data files in the data set included:

* X_train.txt/X_test.txt - Training and testing data, containing 561 features per row

* y_train.txt/y_test.txt - Training and testing data, containing codes representing the subject activities corresponding to each row of the X_train/test data set

* subject_train.txt/subject_test.txt - Training and testing data, containing codes representing the subject monitored corresponding to each row of the X_train/test data set

* Inertial Signals

  -- body_acc_x_train.txt/body_acc_x_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope along the x axis for each window sample.  Each row in the data set contains 128 values, representing 2.56 seconds of samples, or 0.02s between sample times within a row.
  
  -- body_acc_y_train.txt/body_acc_y_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope along the y axis for each window sample.
  
  -- body_acc_z_train.txt/body_acc_z_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope along the z axis for each window sample.
  
  -- body_gyro_x_train.txt/body_gyro_x_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the body acceleration signal along the x axis obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 
  
  -- body_gyro_y_train.txt/body_gyro_y_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the body acceleration signal along the y axis obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 
  
  -- body_gyro_z_train.txt/body_gyro_z_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the body acceleration signal along the z axis obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. 
  
  -- total_acc_x_train.txt/total_acc_x_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer x axis in standard gravity units 'g'.
  
  -- total_acc_y_train.txt/total_acc_y_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer y axis in standard gravity units 'g'.
  
  -- total_acc_z_train.txt/total_acc_z_test.txt - Training and testing data, measuring the acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer z axis in standard gravity units 'g'.




The following transformations were performed on the data set:

* For each pair of files discussed above the training and test data sets were merged, to create combination (combo replacing train | test) data sets saved as R table (*.Rda) files.

* The X_combo (combined X_train/X_test) data set columns were labeled using the 561 feature names, and a subset of the data containing only the mean and standard deviation based features extracted (named filtered_cols).

* A new column was inserted into each combined data set (excluding the y and subject data sets) representing the type of activity associated with each observation (row of data).  Labels in the activity column for each row were one of the following: WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING or LAYING.

* The columns of measured values in the Inertial Signals data sets were labeled based on the data type (body_acc_x|y|z, body_gyro_x|y|z, or total_acc_x|y|z), and the relative sample times of the column values as compared to the initial sample time for each row.  For example, body_acc_x_2.00 is the label of the 100th numeric values column (100 x 0.02 sec) in the body_acc_x_combo data set.

* The Inertial Signal data sets were merged, a subject code column inserted (designating the subject associated with each row of data) and the mean of each variable for each per subject & activity combination was determined.  The resulting table was labeled data_means.

* The subject code column was inserted into the X_combo data set, and the mean of each variable for each per subject & activity combination was determined.  The resulting table was labeled featured_means.

Each data set modified or generated by the script is stored in the results directory, under the base (UCI HAR Dataset) directory. 
